.\" Sendooway - a multi-user and multi-target SMTP proxy
.\"   Copyright (C) 2012-2014 Michael Kammer
.\"   Published under the GNU GPL version 3 (or later)
.\"
.\" Sendooway is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" Sendooway is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with Sendooway.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH sendooway.conf 5
.SH NAME
sendooway.conf \- the configuration file for the Sendooway SMTP proxy

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsendooway.conf\fP is the central configuration file for
\fBsendooway\fP(1). It is also used as per-user includes allowing users
to define their own mail transfer settings.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Every line consists of a keyword/value-pair which is separated by an
equality sign ('='). All characters that follow a hash ('#') and
completely empty lines are ignored. Both spaces (' ') and tab spaces
('\\t') can be used as separators around the equality sign or at the
beginning of a line. But their use is not required.
.PP
Keywords and most values are not case-sensitive. Exceptions
(e.g. passwords) will be described in the following sections. Values can
be numbers, strings, booleans or part of an enumeration. Strings are
\fInot\fP enclosed by inverted commas. Boolean values must be given as
\fByes\fP or \fBno\fP.

.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
A \fBsendooway.conf\fP file might contain passwords in plain text. If
that is true for you, this file should be owned by \fIroot\fP with mode
\fI0600\fP. In all other cases it should not be writable by normal
users.

.SH EXPLANATION OF EACH KEYWORD
.TP
.B localname \fP[string]
This should be set to the fully-qualified host name of your system. It
is used to identify Sendooway to mail clients and external mail transfer
agents using the SMTP EHLO command.
.PP
.RS
If no value is given (or this option is missing) Sendooway will use the
return value of gethostname(). However it is strongly recommend
specifying the host name by yourself.
.RE

.TP
.B cloneEhlo \fP[boolean]
Every mail client has to identify itself before it is allowed to
authenticate. Say \fByes\fP here if you want Sendooway to clone this
string when it connects to the remote server. You might want to set this
option to hide the existence of Sendooway to remote systems. For this
purpose see also \fBaddReceivedField\fP below.
.PP
.RS
If \fIno\fP is specified (or this option is missing) Sendooway will use
the value of \fBlocalname\fP instead.
.RE

.TP
.B addReceivedField \fP[boolean]
Normally each SMTP server adds a \fIReceived\fP line inside the mail
header. If you want to hide the existence of Sendooway (e.g. use
Sendooway as fully transparent proxy) you should set this option to
\fIno\fP.
.PP
.RS
If \fIyes\fP is specified (or this option is missing) Sendooway will
add a line inside the mail header.
.RE

.TP
.B timeout \fP[number]
This is the maximum time in seconds Sendooway will wait when reading
data from TCP connections (with a mail client \fIor\fP a remote server).
When no data is received within this timeout the connection will be
terminated. This value defaults to 300 seconds (5 minutes).

.TP
.B sslCA \fP[string]
This file holds known certificate authorities. It defaults to
\fI/etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt\fP but some distributions might
use different file locations.
.PP
.RS
Users can redefine this value to use include their own CAs. This is
especially reasonable when users trust certificates the system
administrator does not want to trust -- or the other way around.
.RE

.PP
.B sslCert
.RS
.RE
.B sslKey \fP[string]
.RS
These files contain the certificate/key when Sendooway acts as secure
mail server. If Sendooway only serves local connections (or you are
ssh tunneling) then you probably do not want to use encryption. In all
other cases you \fIreally\fP should generate a certificate to offer
secured connections.
.RE

.TP
.B mailerEncryption \fP[tristate]
This option controls how Sendooway handles secured connections. It
knows about the following values:
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B allowed \fP(default)
Connections may be secured by using the \fISTARTTLS\fP extension or the
\fI--ssl\fP command line switch; however, a mail client is also allowed
to send plain passwords over an unsecure channel.
.TP
.B required
Connections must be secured in order to authenticate.
.TP
.B forbidden
Entirely disables encryption support and allows unsecured
authentication. This is only useful for connections that are known to be
secure.
.RE

.TP
.B ext8BitMime \fP[tristate]
Every modern MTA should support 8-bit encodings. Sendooway can handle
this but it is unable to re-encode messages if the remote server relies
on 7-bit data. Strictly speaking we must not accept 8-bit messages for
backwards compatibility. The following values are accepted:
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B force \fP(default)
Propagate 8-bit-mime support and fail if the
remote host does not do the same. This would disable some very old
SMTP servers.
.TP
.B disable
Do not propagate 8-bit-mime but support it anyway. You should only use
this option when you 1) depend on very old servers \fIand\fP 2) use mail
clients that fall back on 7-bit-encodings. Personally we would try to
avoid this setting.
.TP
.B ignore
Propagate 8-bit-mime and ignore specifications of remote servers. Nearly
every server out there \fIshould\fP support this. This setting is the
recommend one but since it breaks the standards it is not set be default.
.RE

.TP
.B extMessageSize \fP[multi]
This is the maximum message size in bytes a client is elated to submit.
Be aware that this is only a \fIvery\fP soft limit because clients might
simply ignore this limitation. This option also breaks the standards
since Sendooway might advertise a message limit which is higher than the
maximum message size of the relevant server. Possible values are:
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B disable
Entirely disable the \fIsize\fP extension. If set, Sendooway will not
inform the client about message limits and might consume lots of useless
traffic.
.TP
.B 0 \fP(default)
Advertise the \fIsize\fP extension but do not inform the client about
actual message length limitations. However the client is encourage to
tell the actual message size \fIbefore\fP sending the message data.
Sendooway can than relay this information to the remote server. This
option is the recommend default.
.TP
.B [size]
Advertise a message limit of \fB[size]\fP bytes. Apart from that behave
like \fB0\fP above.
.RE

.PP
.B smarthostPlain
.RS
.RE
.B smarthostLogin
.RS
.RE
.B smarthostCramMD5 \fP[tristate]
.RS
Tells Sendooway which mechanisms should be used to authenticate at
remote servers. Each of these three options can have one of the
following values:
.PP
.TP
.B ifAdvertised \fP(default)
Use this mechanism only if the remote server has advertised it. This is
the default.
.TP
.B alwaysTry
Always try to use this mechanism no matter whether the remote server has
advertised it. This is especially interesting for \fICRAM-MD5\fP because
it tries to avoid sending a plain text password. This breaks standards
and might corrupt the connection to some remote servers.
.TP
.B never
Avoid using this mechanism.
.RE

.TP
.B authBackend \fP[tristate]
Sendooway can authenticate users against PAM or LDAP. Both modules might
have been disabled at compile time. The following values are valid:
.RS
.TP
.B PAM \fP(default)
Users are authenticated against PAM with the realm \fIsendooway\fP.
Sendooway sends the password as response to the first PAM request. If
you heavily modified your PAM configuration be sure to provide a simple
backup for Sendooway. However, the default setup will work fine on most
systems.
.PP
.RS
Sendooway uses NSS to request additional user attributes.
.RE
.TP
.B LDAP
Users are validated by authenticating their DN on an LDAPv3 server. At
the moment, only simple binding is supported by Sendooway and there is
no support for anonymous or administrative binds. If this method is used
values for \fIldapAuthDN\fP and \fIldapUri\fP must be provided as well
(see below).
.PP
.RS
Sendooway uses LDAP to request additional user attributes.
.RE
.TP
.B none
Disable multi-user support. Sendooway will only accept the name of the
system user running the process. The supplied password will not be
checked. This method is useful for embedded environments without
multi-user support or when Sendooway is used over a secured console.
.PP
.RS
Sendooway uses NSS to request additional user attributes.
.RE
.RE

.TP
.B ldapAuthDN \fP[string]
If using the LDAP backend, Sendooway will validate users by
authenticating them on the LDAP server. This value describes how
usernames are mapped to DNs. The placeholder \fI%u\fP is replaced
by the username. The corresponding entry must implement the
\fIposixaccount\fP objectclass because Sendooway will work with the
\fIuidNumber\fP, \fIgidNumber\fP and \fIhomedirectory\fP attributes.
.PP

.TP
.B ldapUri \fP[string]
If using the LDAP backend, this value must contain one or more LDAP
servers. A server must be named in URI style which looks like
ldap://example/, ldaps://example/ or ldap://example:port/. Several
URIs can be seperated by spaces.
.PP

.TP
.B ldapSSLca \fP[string]
This file holds known certificate authorities for the LDAP client. It
defaults to be the same value as \fIsslCA\fP if not otherwise specified.
.PP

.TP
.B validUser \fP[string]
This keyword is special. If there is no such keyword inside your
configuration file every user is allowed to use Sendooway (as long as
(s)he is able to authenticate against PAM/LDAP). This is, of course, the
default behavior.
.PP
.RS
If Sendooway should only be available for selected users those have to
be listed here. Note that this keyword has to be \fIrepeated for
every\fP single user. You can also enable an entire user group by
specifying the group name prefixed with a percentage sign ('%').
.RE
.PP
.RS
\fBNOTE:\fP The \fIvalidUser\fP keyword is currently not supported by
the LDAP backend and will be ignored silently.
.RE

.TP
.B smarthostMapping \fP[string]
This keyword can be given multiple times. It tells Sendooway where
remote authentication information can be looked up. Surely this is the
most important setting. Every mapping is prefixed with the adequate file
type, followed by a colon (':') and the name of the file. Finally there
are three supported file types:
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B getmail [filename]
Parse an adapted \fIgetmailrc\fP-like file. Like above \fI%h\fP and
\fI%u\fP are replaced with proper values. Mostly this option is
specified in user configuration files. For more information see
section \fBUSING GETMAILRC\fP below.
.TP
.B fetchmail [filename]
Parse an adapted \fI.fetchmailrc\fP-like file. The strings \fI%h\fP and
\fI%u\fP are replaced by the home path resp. the name of the
authenticated user. See section \fBUSING FETCHMAILRC\fP below.
.TP
.B direct [address] [server] [port] [username] [password] [options]
This format can be used if neither fetchmail nor getmail are used. Use
it to connect users that send as \fB[address]\fP directly to the SMTP
server on host \fB[server]\fP and listening on \fB[port]\fP;
authenticate as \fB[username]\fP with the password \fB[password]\fP.
\fB[option]\fP is a comma separated list of zero or more of the
following keywords:
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B tls
Connect to the SMTP server using the transport layer security protocol
(TLS).
.TP
.B ssl
Connect to the SMTP server using the secured socket layer (SSL).
.TP
.B noCertCheck
If \fBtls\fP or \fBssl\fP are defined, then errors on certificate
validation are ignored. Nevertheless validation errors are always
logged.
.TP
.B noAuth
Do not try to authenticate on remote side and ignore the values
of the username and password field. A hyphen ('-') is the recommend
placeholder for both fields.
.RE
.PP
If the \fBsmarthostMapping\fP keyword is neither given inside your
global \fInor\fP user configuration file, then the following default
is used:
.PP
.RS
.nf
smarthostMapping = getmail:%h/.getmail/getmailrc
smarthostMapping = fetchmail:%h/.fetchmailrc
.fi
.RE
.RE
.PP
.TP
.B userInclude \fP[string]
Some values should be defined on a per-user basis. As soon as a user is
successfully authenticated agains PAM Sendooway will try use load the
file specified here (\fI%h\fP and \fI%u\fP are replaced by the home dir
resp. the name of according user). User settings are always preferred
against global ones but Sendooway will fall back to global
\fBsmarthostMapping\fPs if no per-user mapping fits. Since this file is
loaded after user authentication some settings are useless (e.g.
\fBext8BitMime\fP and such).
.PP
All other keywords are rejected.

.SH USING GETMAILRC
Each \fIgetmailrc\fP-like defines exactly one mail account. If more than
one account is used, multiple files have to be parsed. Unfortunately,
there is no standard on where to save those files and you have to
specify the location for each file. This is usually done with several
\fBsmarthostMapping=getmail:\fP entries inside your Sendooway
configuration.
.PP
We assume that you are familiar with \fBgetmail\fP(1) and its
configuration files. Sendooway defines a new section named
\fB[sender]\fP. Inside this section the following keyword-value-pairs
are valid:
.PP
.TP
.B type
This defines how the remote server can be reached. At the moment
Sendooway supports three different sender types:
.RS
.TP
.B SimpleSMTPSender
Mails are sent over an unencrypted connection. You hopefully do not
need this.
.TP
.B SimpleSMTPSSLSender
The SMTP connection is encrypted using the secured socket layer (SSL).
.TP
.B SimpleSMTPTLSSender
This is the most modern way of using the SMTP protocol. Sendooway will
secure the connection using the transport layer security protocol (TLS).
.RE
.TP
.B no_certificate_check
If \fBSimpleSMTPTLSSender\fP or \fBSimpleSMTPSSLSender\fP are used above
and this option is set to \fBtrue\fP, then errors on certificate
validation are ignored. Nevertheless validation errors are always
logged.
.TP
.B server
This defines the SMTP server which has to be used for outgoing mails. If
no remote server is defined Sendooway will fall back to the incoming
mail server (IMAP/POP3/whatever). However you are \fIreally\fP
encouraged to define an outgoing server.
.TP
.B port
Per default, Sendooway will try to contact the remote server on TCP port
587 (or port 465 for SSL connections). Port 25 is only used for
unencrypted connections (but this might change in future). If you want
to connect to another port, it can be specified here. The value can be a
number between 1 and 65535 or the corresponding service name.
.TP
.B username
This is the username for the remote SMTP server. If this keyword
is not given Sendooway will use the same username as getmail uses for
mail retrieval. If you do not want to use remote side authentication,
define an empty username here.
.TP
.B password
Like above but for your account password.
.PP
.TP
.B address
This keyword is mandatory. It defines the mail address which is used for
outgoing mails. If the address matches the address a mail client uses as
sender address, then (and only then) Sendooway connects to the server
specified above. The \fBaddress\fP value can be defined multiple times
if more than one mail address belongs to this account.
.PP
Below is an example. It asks getmail to retrieve mails for user
\fIalice\fP and password \fIsecret\fP from \fImailbox.moon.net\fP.
Sendooway will send outgoing mails over \fImx.moon.net\fP with TLS
encryption and the same account data as long as the sender address
matches \fIalice@moon.net\fP or \fIbobs_angel@moon.net\fP.
.PP
.RS
.nf
[destination]
type = Maildir
path = ~/Maildir/

[retriever]
type = SimplePOP3SSLRetriever
server = mailbox.moon.net
username = alice
password = secret

[sender]
type = SimpleSMTPTLSSender
server = mx.moon.net
address = alice@moon.net
address = bobs_angel@moon.net
.fi
.RE

.SH USING FETCHMAILRC
You can define several mail accounts inside a single
\fIfetchmailrc\fP-like file. Normally you should only want to use those
files if you are using \fBfetchmail\fP(1) and already know how it has to
be configured to retrieve mails.
.PP
At the moment fetchmail does not allow additional information inside
its configuration file. For that reason Sendooway's keywords are
prefixed with a hash ('#') and thus be considered as comments. Foreach
definied account Sendooway recognizes the following keywords:
.TP
.B #sendooway:server [smtp server]
This is mandatory and defines the SMTP server which has to be used for
outgoing mails.
.TP
.B #sendooway:port [smtp port]
Per default Sendooway will try to contact the remote server on TCP port
587 (or port 465 for SSL connections). Port 25 is only used for
unencrypted connections (but this might change in future). If you want
to connect to another port it can be specified here. \fB[smtp port]\fP
can be a numeric value between 1 and 65535 or the corresponding service
name.
.TP
.B #sendooway:user [username]
This is the username for the outgoing SMTP connection. If this keyword
is not given Sendooway will use the same username as fetchmail uses for
mail retrieval.
.TP
.B #sendooway:pass [password]
Like above but for your account password.
.PP
.TP
.B #sendooway:tls
Connect to the SMTP server using the transport layer security protocol
(TLS).
.TP
.B #sendooway:ssl
Connect to the SMTP server using the secured socket layer (SSL).
.TP
.B #sendooway:noCertCheck
If \fB#sendooway:tls\fP or \fB#sendooway:ssl\fP are defined, then errors
on certificate validation are ignored. Nevertheless validation errors
are always logged.
.TP
.B #sendooway:noAuth
Do not try to authenticate on remote side.
.TP
.B #sendooway:address [mail address]
This keyword is mandatory and \fImust be the last option\fP of any
account. It defines the mail address which is used for outgoing mails.
If this address matches the address a mail client uses as sender
address then (and only then) Sendooway connects to the server specified
above.
.PP
Below is an example. It asks fetchmail to retrieve mails for user
\fIalice\fP and password \fIsecret\fP from \fImailbox.moon.net\fP.
Sendooway will send outgoing mails over \fImx.moon.net\fP with TLS
encryption and the same account data as long as the sender address
matches \fIalice@moon.net\fP.
.PP
.RS
.nf
server "mailbox.moon.net"
   protocol pop3
   user "alice"
   pass "secret"
   #sendooway:server "mx.moon.net"
   #sendooway:tls
   #sendooway:address "alice@moon.net"
.fi
.RE

.SH AUTHOR
Michael Kammer

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBsendooway\fP(1), \fBfetchmail\fP(1), \fBgetmail\fP(1)
.PP
For the feature list and some default configuration files have a look
at Sendooway's beautiful homepage at
.I http://www.kuspbv.de/sendooway/
